Hi, and welcome to the class
on multivariable regression,
as part of our course here at
Data Science Specialization.
In this lecture,
we're gonna talk about instances where
we have lots of potential predictors for
an outcome, rather than just a single
predictor in linear regression.
In any instance, where you're using
a predictor X to predict a response Y,
and you find a nice relationship,
if that predictor
hasn't been randomized to the subjects or
units, whatever you're looking at,
then there's always a concern that there's
another variable that you either know
about or don't know about that
might explain the relationship.
And let me give you an example.
Imagine if you had a friend that
downloaded some data, where they had all
sorts of health information from people
and also their dietary information.
And this person said, hey,
I found something interesting.
Breath mint usage has a significant
regression relationship with forced
expiratory volume, a measure of
lung function, pulmonary function.
If you've ever gotten an asthma test,
they'll measure your FEV.
Well, you would be skeptical.
I mean, there's very little basis for
a biological relationship there.
Breath mints are just sugar.
It doesn't seem reasonable that
they would impact lung function.
But maybe, but
what you've really be thinking is,
well, what other variables might
be explaining this relationship?
And you might come up with two hypotheses.
One is, this person dug through lots and
lots and lots of variables and
just found the one that was significant,
and it's just a chance of association.
And that's the problem of multiplicity.
Okay, so we'll talk about that in other
aspects of this course in the inference
course, but let's just assume that this
person didn't do that, they looked only
at a couple of variables, and
the multiplicity concerns weren't so bad.
Then what would you think?
Well, likely, you would think,
well, probably the real problem is smokers
tend to use more breath mints, and
smoking has this long relationship
with lung function, so
it's well-established that
chronic exposure to a smoker,
even second-hand smoke has
negative impacts on lung function.
So it's probably that, it probably has
nothing to do with the breath mints,
it's a indirect effect of
breath mints through smoking,
not a direct effect of breath
mints on lung function.
That would be your likely hypothesis.
Well, how would you establish that there's
a breath mint effect beyond smoking?
Well, likely,
what you would ask your friend to do is,
well ,consider smokers by themselves,
and see whether their lung function
differs by their breath mint usage, and
consider non-smokers by themselves, and
see whether their lung function
differs by breath mint usage,
where you've conditioned on smoking status
so that you're comparing like with like.
Well, multi-rate regression
is sort of automated way to
do that in a linear fashion.
It make assumptions, which is fair enough,
but it does that sort in automated way,
and we'll explain in this lecture
in what way is it trying to sort of
hold smoking status constant while
looking at breath mint usage,
and how it adjusts, and we'll also talk
a little bit about its limitations.
But that's the fundamental idea of what
multivariable regression is trying to do.
It's trying to look at
the relationship of a predictor and
a response, while having, at some level,
accounted for other variables.
So in addition to the use of multivariable
regression that I talked about in
the previous slide,
I wanted to also talk about another use of
multivariable regression for prediction.
It's actually a very
good prediction model.
So, as an example, several of us
engaged around here engaged in this so
called CAGO competition, to predict
the number of days that a person
would be in the hospital in subsequent
years given their claims history and
number of days they were in
the hospital in previous years.
And this is of major
importance to hospitals and
insurance companies and healthcare
providers for a variety of reasons.
It's one of the main
questions in that field.
So, in this competition,
they gave you historic claims data,
a lot of it, actually, which had lots and
lots of predictors, and
the number of days that several
people of the insured people from
this company were in the hospital for
[NOISE] three consecutive years or so.
And simple linear regression certainly
wouldn't have been too much use here.
It's good for looking at variables
at a time really quickly, but
if you wanted to get good prediction you
needed to do something more complicated.
So there's multiple parts about this, so
one of the main things is model search.
How do we pick which
predictors to include?
That's an important component of this.
And the other is to avoid overfittings.
We'll learn that, as you put enough
variables into a multivariable
progression model, you'll get zero
residuals just by virtue of having
included even random vectors
into your regression model.
So certainly there's consequences
to throwing lots of garbagey
predictors into a model.
And certainly there must
be consequences to omitting
important predictors in a model.
And in the practical
machine learning class,
which is also part of the specialization,
you will learn a lot about model
selection strategies as they
relate to the idea of prediction.
In this class, we're gonna focus more on
the problems from the previous slide,
where we want to generate
parsimonious models, where we're
deeply interested in interpreting
the coefficients from the linear model.
And so the prediction problems,
like this one,
are a little bit more geared toward
our practical machine learning class.
But I just wanted to mention
that multivariable regression is
a pretty good starting
point in any prediction,
anytime where you're developing
a prediction algorithm.
What we found in that competition is that
multivariable regression got you very
close to the winning entry, and
lots of machine learning, and
random forest, and boosting, and
all these other things, those only
got you minor bumps on top of that.
And so,
to get huge drops in prediction error,
well-thought out linear models sufficed,
and
then to get really minor increments beyond
that, you had to throw a lot of computing.
And to be fair, those did improve
your chances, and we moved up
a little bit in the leaderboard by adding
some of these more complicated things.
But it was remarkable how far you could
get with just well done linear models.
So, our linear model looks an awful
lot like our simple linear model.
It's just that we have more variables.
So our outcome, Y,
it might be insurance claims or
forced expiratory volume,
is equal to a bunch of coefficients.
These are the beta terms, they're like the
slope terms in simple linear regression.
Just, now there's more predictor terms,
more X values.
So, for example, one of these might,
X1 might be breath mint usage of binary or
variable, and X2 might be number of
pack years or how much a person smoked.
And in the insurance case,
X1 might be the number of
insurance claims in the previous year,
and X2 might be whether or
not this person had a particular
cardiac problem, something like that,
that might lead toward information about
hospitalization in the successive year.
So here,
we just write out the linear model.
And it just looks like the outcome
is equal to a bunch of coefficients
times predictors.
Now, it's linear because it's
linear in the coefficient.
So I'll reiterate that point in a minute.
I would also add that the first variable
is typically just a constant one,
so there's an intercept that's included,
a term that's just beta by itself.
Beta zero usually or Beta one.
So our least squares,
I think everyone could probably guess
what the least squares is going to do.
It's just gonna look at the differences
between the outcome and the prediction
from the linear models, summation of
the predictors times their coefficients.
Because that's not necessarily positive,
we're gonna square it and we're going
to add it up so this difference for
every observation equally weights into
this loss function that we created.
So least squares simply wants
to minimize this equation.
And it's a direct extension of
the equation we wanted to minimize
when we had simple linear regression.
And I would notice that the important
linearity is linearity in the coefficient.
So for example, if I take one of
my X's and just square it, meaning
if I have a vector in R that I've just
squared every element of that vector and
put that in as part of my model, then that
will still be linear in the coefficient.
The coefficient won't be squared,
it will just be the X term.
And so, the important version of linearity
is linearity in the coefficient.
That's what defines a linear model.